 
 
Form No: HCJD/C-121 
JUDGMENT SHEET. 
 
IN THE ISLAMABAD HIGH COURT, 
ISLAMABAD. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Writ Petition No.213/2023 
 
 
 
 
Waheed Ashraf 
 
 
Versus 
 
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 Petitioner(s) By : Hafiz Muhammad Idris, Syed Farid Ahmed 
Bukhari, Mr. Usman Kiyani, Mian Haseeb 
Ali Bhatti, Mr. Muhammad Aslam Hayat, 
Mr. Muhammad Naeem Siddique Bhatti, 
Mr. Asif Farid, Mr. Sajid Naseem, Mr. 
Usman Ahmed Ranjha, Ms. Sabila Daraz 
Khan, Syed Ali Murtaza Abbas, Mirza 
Saqib Siddique, Mr. Waqar Javed, Ms. 
Fatima, Ms. Aiema Asrar, Malik Nasir 
Abbas Awan, Mr. Asif Saeed Mughal, Mr. 
Muhammad Musawar Gill, Mr. Khalil ur 
Rehman, Mr. Faisal Rasheed Ghouri, Mr. 
Faisal Jaffar Khan, Mr. Imran Ul Haq, Ms. 
Shazia Nadeem Malik and Mr. Hamid 
Jalal,  Advocates. 
Mr. Ejaz Hussain Rathore, Petitioner in 
person. 
 
 Respondents By : Mr. Ghulam Qasim Bhatti, Syed Ishfaq 
Hussain Naqvi, Barrister Atif Rahim Burki 
and Barrister Sohail Nawaz, Advocates. 
Syed Ahsan Raza Kazmi, Deputy Attorney 
General. 
 
 
 Assisted By : Ms. Maheen Zeeshan Law Clerk 
 
  
Date of Hearing  
:  
15.01.2024.  
 
  
     
  AAMER FAROOQ, C.J. – This judgment shall decide the 
captioned writ petition as well as writ petitions mentioned in the schedule, 
attached herewith, as common question of law is involved. 
2. The Petitioners, in all the petitions, have challenged the provision of 
section 7E of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 (―the Ordinance”), 
inserted through the Finance Act, 2022, on the basis that it is ultra vires 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
2 
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (―the 
Constitution”) for being beyond the competence of the Federal 
Legislature, and for being discriminatory and confiscatory violating 
Constitutional rights, hence is liable to be struck down.  
3. 
In order to avoid any overlap or conflict, and for the ease of 
reference, the submissions made by all the Petitioners in the captioned 
petition, and the scheduled connected petitions, are discussed jointly. 
Learned counsels for the Petitioners1 submitted, inter alia, that through 
section 7E of the Ordinance (―the impugned provision”), tax has been 
levied on deemed income derived from immovable assets, as specified 
therein, equal to 5% of the fair market value of the assets at the rates 
specified in Division VIIIC of Part-I of the First Schedule to the Ordinance. 
It was contended that the impugned provision is tantamount to levy of tax 
on immovable property, which is beyond the competence of the Parliament 
pursuant to the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In this behalf, 
it was contended that with respect to Entries No.47 & 50, as provided in 
the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, the Parliament does have 
competence to impose income tax, however, it has no competence to levy 
any tax on immoveable property, whereas, in essence, the impugned tax is 
on immoveable property. Learned counsels further contended that while 
interpreting relevant Schedule entries and the tax levied, the pith and 
substance of the levy is to be examined and the same is not to be taken on 
its face value. It was further argued that since levy in question is on 
1Hafiz Muhammad Idris, Syed Farid Ahmed Bukhari, Mr. Usman Kiyani, Mian Haseeb Ali Bhatti, Mr. 
Muhammad Aslam Hayat, Mr. Muhammad Naeem Siddique Bhatti, Mr. Asif Farid, Mr. Sajid Naseem, Mr. 
Usman Ahmed Ranjha, Ms. Sabila Daraz Khan, Syed Ali Murtaza Abbas, Mirza Saqib Siddique, Mr. Waqar 
Javed, Ms. Fatima, Ms. Aiema Asrar, Malik Nasir Abbas Awan, Mr. Asif Saeed Mughal, Mr. Muhammad 
Musawar Gill, Mr. Khalil ur Rehman, Mr. Faisal Rasheed Ghouri, Mr. Faisal Jaffar Khan, Mr. Imran 
Ul Haq, Ms. Shazia Nadeem Malik and Mr. Hamid Jalal,  Advocates. 
Mr. Ejaz Hussain Rathore, Petitioner in person. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
3 
immovable property, it is beyond the competence of Federal Legislature, 
and it is, thus, ultra vires the Constitution. Learned counsels for the 
Petitioners contended that the tax in question is confiscatory in nature 
inasmuch as no income is actually generated through the immoveable 
property specified therein, and payment of the same is to be made from 
the personal resources of the taxpayer rather than from any income 
generated from the assets. It was contended that, in light of the judgment 
of the Supreme Court of Pakistan reported as M/s Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd. 
versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1997 SC 582)
 , where tax is confiscatory 
in 
nature, it violates the fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution, hence it is liable to be struck down. It was added that under 
sub-section 2 of the impugned provision, certain exemptions have been 
granted for payment of tax and bare reading of the same shows that those 
exemptions are discriminatory in nature, and thus are in violation of Article 
25 of the Constitution. It was also contended that the method of payment 
of the tax is unreasonable and vague as tax is to be paid on 5% of the fair 
market value of the capital assets as deemed income. It was also 
submitted that ―capital asset‖ has been defined and explained in the 
impugned provision as immoveable property; and that the impugned 
provision has been given retrospective effect. Learned counsels apprised 
the Court that petitions challenging vires of section 7E of the Ordinance 
were also filed before the Sindh High Court as well as the Lahore High 
Court and the Peshawar High Court. In this behalf, it may be noted that 
that the Sindh High Court upheld the impugned provision, whereas the 
Lahore High Court undertook the exercise of reading down and suggested 
certain modifications, while the Peshawar High Court struck down the 
impugned provision as being ultra vires the Constitution.  
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
4 
4. 
Learned counsel for the Respondents2 contended, inter alia, that 
Entry No.47 to the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution empowers the 
Parliament to legislate and the Federal Government to levy tax on any 
income other than agricultural income. It was submitted that the basic 
definition of ―income‖ is provided in clause 29 of section 2 of the 
Ordinance, which is inclusive, meaning it is not exhaustive. It was 
contended that in the landmark judgment of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in M/s Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
1997 SC 582)
 , various principles have been laid down and tax on the 
capacity of any company was held to be intra vires. It was contended that 
in order to declare a statute ultra vires, the principles laid down in Lahore 
Development Authority versus Ms. Imrana Tiwana (2015 SCMR 1739
 ) are 
to be followed, which provide that the law is to be saved rather than 
destroyed and that the provision under challenge ought to be retained in a 
way so as to save it rather than to destroy by striking it down. It was also 
contended that the law cannot be struck down simply for being 
confiscatory in nature as it does not amount to violation of the Constitution 
or fundamental rights. It was also submitted that the law can be made 
applicable retrospectively insofar as any vested rights are not taken away 
which is not the case. Reference was made to the following case law qua 
the submissions addressed: Army Welfare Sugar Mills versus Federation of 
Pakistan (1992 SCMR 1652)
 , 
Muhammad Husain and others versus 
Muhammad and others (2000 SCMR 367
 ), Annoor Textile Mills Ltd. versus 
The Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1994 SC 568
 ), Haji Dossa Limited, Karachi 
versus Province of Punjab through Collector Sahiwal and others (1973 
2Mr. Ghulam Qasim Bhatti, Syed Ishfaq Hussain Naqvi, Barrister Atif Rahim Burki and Barrister 
Sohail Nawaz, Advocates. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 5 
SCMR 124), Zaman Cement Company (Pvt) Limited versus Central Board of 
Revenue and others (2002 SCMR 312), Zakaria H.A SattarBilwani versus 
Inspecting Additional Commissioner of Wealth Tax (2003 SCMR 
271),Sardar Sher Bahadar Khan versus Election Commission of Pakistan 
(PLD 2018 SC 97), Mst. Sarwar Ja versus Mukhtar Ahmad (PLD 2012 SC 
217), Zila Council Jehlum versus Messrs Pakistan Tobacco Company Ltd. 
(PLD 2016 SC 398), Government of Pakistan versus MessrsMardan 
Industries and another (1988 SCMR 410), Ashraf Sugar Mills versus 
Federation of Pakistan (1996 PLC 145), Pakistan through Ministry of 
Finance versus Fecto Belarus Tractors Ltd. (PLD 2002 SC 208), Molasse 
Trading & Export  versus Federation of Pakistan (1993 SCMR 1905), 
Province of East Pakistan versus Sharafatullah (PLD 1970 SC 514), Shell 
Pakistan Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (2023 PTD 607 Sindh), 
Muhammad Khalid Qureshi versus Province of Punjab (2017 PTD 805 
Lahore),  Province of Punjab versus National Industries Cooperative Credit 
Corporation (2000 SCMR 567), Education Services (Pvt) Ltd. versus 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2016 Islamabad 141), A.M. Khan Leghari 
versus Government of Pakistan (PLD 1967 Lahore 227), NihayatUllah 
versus Secretary Local Government (PLD 2004 Peshawar 54), Federation of 
Pakistan versus Haji Muhammad Sadiq (2007 PTD 67 (SC), Lahore 
Development Authority versus Ms. ImranaTiwana (2015 SCMR 1739), 
Muhammad RamzanKatiar versus Pakistan Refinery Limited (2013 CLD 233 
Sindh), Muzaffar Khan versus Evacuee Trust Property (2002 CLC 1819 
Lahore), M/s Dewan Textile Mills Ltd. versus Pakistan (1984 CLC 1740 
Karachi), Amin Textile Mills versus Federation of Pakistan (2002 CLC 1714 
Karachi), Syed Manzoor Hussain Bokhari versus SP City Lahore (1990 MLD 
1807 Lahore), Call Tell versus Federation of Pakistan (2005 PTD 833 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
6 
Karachi
 ), Human Rights Commission of Pakistan versus Government of 
Pakistan (PLD 2009 SC 507
 ), Shafique Ahmed versus Government of 
Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 168
 ), M/s Shappire Textile Mills versus Federation 
of Pakistan (PLD 2006 Karachi 554
 ), M/s Pioneer Traders versus Province 
of Sindh (PLD 2006 Karachi 648
 ), Imdad Hussain versus Province of Sindh 
(2007 Karachi 116
 ), Sarfraz Ahmad Tarar versus Province of Punjab (PLD 
2007 Lahore 57
 ), District Magistrate Lahore Commissioner, Lahore Division 
versus Syed Raza kazim (PLD 1961 SC 178
 ), State of M.P versus Rakesh 
Kohli (2013 SCMR 34
 ), Jibendra Kishore Achharyya versus The Province of 
East Pakistan (Revenue Department) (PLD 1957 SC (Pak) 9
 ), Mr. 
FazlulQuaderChowdhry versus Mr. Muhammad Abdul Haque (PLD 1963 SC 
486
 ), President Reference No.2 of 2005 (PLD 2005 SC 873
 ), M/s Elahi 
Cotton Mills Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1997 SC 582).
 5. 
Submissions of the parties have been heard and the documents 
placed on record examined with their able assistance. 
6. 
Before embarking upon appreciation of the submissions made by 
the parties, it is apt to reproduce the impugned provision and dissect the 
same. The impugned provision is as follows:- 
“7E. Tax on deemed income.
(1) For tax year 2022 and onwards, a tax shall 
be imposed at the rates specified in Division VIIIC of Part-I of the First Schedule 
on the income specified in this section. 
(2)  
A resident person shall be treated to have derived, as income chargeable 
to tax under this section, an amount equal to five percent of the fair market value 
of capital assets situated in Pakistan held on the last day of tax year excluding the 
following, namely:– 
(a)  
(b) 
(c)  
(d)  
one capital asset owned by the resident person; 
self-owned business premises from where the business is carried 
out by the persons appearing on the active taxpayers‘ list at any 
time during the year; 
self-owned agriculture land where agriculture activity is carried out 
by person excluding farmhouse and land annexed thereto; 
capital asset allotted to – 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
(i)  
7 
a Shaheed or dependents of a shaheed belonging to Pakistan 
Armed Forces; 
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
(e)  
a person or dependents of the person who dies while in the 
service of Pakistan armed forces or Federal or provincial 
government;  
a war wounded person while in service of Pakistan armed 
forces or Federal or provincial government; and 
an ex-serviceman and serving personal of armed forces or ex
employees or serving personnel of Federal and provincial 
governments, being original allottees of the capital asset duly 
certified by the allotment authority; 
any property from which income is chargeable to tax under the 
Ordinance and tax leviable is paid thereon;  
(f)  
(g)  
(h) 
(i)  
capital asset in the first tax year of acquisition where tax under 
section 236K has been paid;  
where the fair market value of the capital assets in aggregate 
excluding the capital assets mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), 
(e) and (f) does not exceed Rupees twenty-five million; 
capital assets owned by a provincial government or a local 
government; or  
capital assets owned by a local authority, a development authority, 
builders and developers for land development and construction, 
subject to the condition that such persons are registered with 
Directorate General of Designated Non-Financial Businesses and 
Professions.  
Provided that the exclusions mentioned at clauses (a), (e), (f) and 
(g) of this sub-section shall not apply in case of a person not appearing in 
the active taxpayers‘ list, other than persons covered in rule 2 of the 
Tenth Schedule. 
(3)  
The Federal Government may include or exclude any person or property 
for the purpose of this section. 
(4)  
In this section– 
(a)  
(b)  ―capital asset‖ means property of any kind held by a person, 
whether or not connected with a business, but does not include – 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv)  
any stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw materials held 
for the purpose of business;  
any shares, stocks or securities; 
any property with respect to which the person is entitled to a 
depreciation deduction under section 22 or amortization 
deduction under section 24; or 
any movable asset not mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) or (iii); ―farmhouse‖ means a house constructed on a total minimum area 
of 2000 square yards with a minimum covered area of 5000 square 
feet used as a single dwelling unit with or without an annex: 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
8 
Provided that where there are more than one dwelling units in a 
compound and the average area of the compound is more than 2000 
square yards for a dwelling unit, each one of such dwelling units shall be 
treated as a separate farmhouse.‖ 
Examination of section 7E ibid shows that tax has been imposed for the tax 
year 2022 and onward at the rates specified in Division VIIIC of Part-I of 
the First Schedule to the Constitution on the income as specified therein. 
Sub-section (2) of the impugned provision is the charging section and it 
levies income tax on an amount equal to 5% of the fair market value of 
the capital assets (deemed income), situated in Pakistan held on the last 
date of the tax year. In this behalf, sub-section (2) ibid states that a 
resident person shall be treated to have derived as income 5% of the fair 
market value of the capital assets, hence derivation of the income is 
deemed and not actual. Certain exemptions have been created, which are 
provided from sub-section (2) (a) to (i). Under sub-section (3) of the 
impugned provision, the Federal Government has been empowered to 
include or exclude any person or property for the purposes of section 7E. 
Sub-section (4), which the definition clause, defines ―capital asset‖ as 
property of any kind held by a person, whether or not connected with a 
business but does not include any stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw 
materials held for the purpose of business; any shares, stocks or 
securities;any property with respect to which the person is entitled to a 
depreciation deduction under section 22 or amortization deduction under 
section 24; or any movable asset. The same also excludes farmhouses 
constructed on a minimum area of 2000 square yards with a minimum 
covered area of 5000 square feet used as a single dwelling unit with or 
without an annex. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
9 
7. 
Before delving into detailed examination of the relevant precedents, 
it is pertinent to note a few key characteristics of tax laws in general. The 
power of the State to impose tax upon its citizens is inherent in the power 
to govern and such power is limited only by constitutional provisions3. It is 
also a well settled principle that all taxes are confiscatory in nature, 
however the element of confiscation is to be justified by the public purpose 
for which a particular tax has been enforced. Constitutional rights and 
provisions act as the safeguard for citizens, and as a check on legislative 
authority, while enacting tax law. Where the public purpose is such that is 
in line with the spirit of the Constitution and the tax enacted is a 
proportional measure to achieve such purpose, the element of confiscation 
shall not render the particular tax to be illegal or ultra vires to the 
Constitution. Where, however, the element of confiscation is not so 
justified, the tax may be regarded as violating Constitutional rights and 
thus may be liable to be struck down. Where the constitutionality of a tax 
law is in issue, the nature of the tax, the measure of the tax and its 
incidence must be considered while determining its validity4. In the instant 
case, while deliberating on the constitutionality and vires of the impugned 
provision,this Court is faced with the following key issues: Legislative 
Competence, Confiscatory Nature, Discriminatory Nature.  
Determination of Constitutionality and Vires
 8. 
Since vires or the legality of the Federal Statute has been put to 
challenge, this Court, at this stage, deems it essential to examine the case 
law developed over a period of time for adjudicating vires of any statute 
and the principles evolving from the referred case law. The most recent 
and authoritative judgment on the question of principles for striking down 
3
 II. Taxing Power, Limitations, and Constitutional Restrictions – Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 84. 
4
 II. Taxing Power, Limitations, and Constitutional Restrictions – Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 84. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
10 
the law or upholding the same is Lahore Development Authority versus Ms. 
Imrana Tiwana (2015 SCMR 1739
 ). In the referred judgment, the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan, after examining the law on the subject laid down 
principles on the touchstone of which vires of law can be examined. The 
principles are summarized in paragraph 65 of the judgment and are as 
follow:- ―I. There is a presumption in favour of constitutionality and a law must not be 
declared unconstitutional unless the statute is placed next to the Constitution and 
no way can be found in reconciling the two; 
II. Where more than one interpretation is possible, one of which would make the 
law valid and the other void, the Court must prefer the interpretation which 
favours validity; 
III. A statute must never be declared unconstitutional unless its invalidity is 
beyond reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt must be resolved in favour of the 
statute being valid; 
IV. If a case can be decided on other or narrower grounds, the Court will abstain 
from deciding the constitutional question; 
V. The Court will not decide a larger constitutional question than is necessary for 
the determination of the case; 
VI. The Court will not declare a statute unconstitutional on the ground that it 
violates the spirit of the Constitution unless it also violates the letter of the 
Constitution; 
VII. The Court is not concerned with the wisdom or prudence of the legislation 
but only with its constitutionality; 
VIII. The Court will not strike down statutes on principles of republican or 
democratic government unless those principles are placed beyond legislative 
encroachment by the Constitution; 
IX. Mala fides will not be attributed to the Legislature.‖ 
In Amin Textile Mills versus Federation of Pakistan (2002 CLC 1714 
Karachi
 ), the Division Bench of the Sindh High Court held that while 
looking from the standpoint of interpretation of statutes or from the angle 
of interpretation of legislative entries in the Constitution, the ordinary, plain 
and grammatical meaning of the words will have to be seen. The Courts 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
11 
have to look at whether in pith and substance the subject matter of levy in 
question comes within the ambit of the relevant entry in the Constitution. 
It was also observed that the Courts have to give a very liberal and 
stretched connotation to the Constitutional entries and in pith and 
substance, the ordinary, grammatical and literal meaning of the terms will 
have to be seen. In Shell Pakistan Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (2023 
PTD 607 Sindh
 ), the Sindh High Court held that scope of a provision 
cannot be extended by analogy or beneficent/equitable construction in 
order to prevent an anomaly and if a section of a taxing statute creates 
doubt or ambiguity then it should not to be construed to extract a new 
added obligation, not formerly cast upon the taxpayer. It was also 
observed that provision of Article 25 of the Constitution envisages equality 
between citizens, however, it allows for differential treatment of persons 
not similarly placed under a reasonable classification. In Province of Punjab 
versus National Industries Cooperative Credit Corporation (2000 SCMR 
567
 ), it was held that if it is found that the impugned legislation is in the 
nature of legislative judgment impinging on judicial power of judiciary, it 
would prime facie be ultra vires the Constitution. In Education Services 
(Pvt) Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2016 Islamabad 141
 ), this 
Court observed that a High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution has 
jurisdiction to examine the validity of any Act of the Parliament and/or 
delegated legislation including notification; in case any law/Act of the 
Parliament violates any provision of the Constitution including fundamental 
rights, the same can be struck down by a High Court in exercise of powers 
under Article 199 of the Constitution; the law can also be struck down if it 
provides unfettered powers/discretion to be exercised in a discriminatory 
manner. In A.M. Khan Leghari versus Government of Pakistan (PLD 1967 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
12 
Lahore 227
 ), the Larger Bench of the Lahore High Court observed that it is 
but a corollary to the general rule of literal construction that nothing is to 
be added to or to be taken from a statute, unless there are similar 
adequate grounds to justify the inference that the Legislature intended 
something which it omitted to express. It was also observed that it is a 
strong thing to read into an Act of Parliament words which are not there 
and in the absence of clear necessity, it is a wrong thing to do. The Court 
is not entitled to read the words into an Act of the Parliament unless clear 
reason for it is to be found within the four corners of the Act itself. In 
Federation of Pakistan versus Haji Muhammad Sadiq (2007 PTD 67 (SC
 ), 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan held that language used in fiscal statute 
would be interpreted in literal and ordinary meanings in favour of the 
taxpayer and that the law should be interpreted in such a manner that the 
same should be saved rather than destroyed. In Messrs Sui Southern Gas 
Company Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (2018 SCMR 802
 ), 
the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan laid down principles for interpretation of entries 
in the legislative lists. It was observed as follows:- ―(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
The entries in the Legislative Lists of the Constitution are not powers of 
legislation but only fields of legislative head. 
In construing the words in an Entry conferring legislative power on a 
legislative authority, the most liberal construction should be put upon the 
words. 
While interpreting an Entry in a Legislative List, it should be given widest 
possible meaning and should not be read in a narrow or restricted sense. 
Each general word in an Entry should be considered to extend to all 
ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to 
be comprehended in it. 
If there appears to be apparent overlapping in respect of the subject
matter of a legislation, an effort has to be made to reconcile the Entries 
to give proper and pertinent meaning to them. 
A general power ought not to be so construed so as to make a particular 
power conferred by the same legislation and operating in the same field a 
nullity. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
13 
(7) 
(8) 
Legislation under attack must be scrutinized in its entirety to determine its 
true character in pith and substance. 
After considering the legislation as a whole in pith and substance, it has 
to be seen as to with respect to which topic or category of legislation in 
the various fields, it deals substantially and directly and not whether it 
would in actual operation affect an item in the forbidden field in an 
indirect way.‖ 
In Messrs Aisha Spinning Mills Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (1995 
PTD 493
 ), the Division Bench of the Lahore High Court also considered the 
principles for construction of entries in the Legislative Lists as contained in 
the Schedule to the Constitution. It was observed that the entries in the 
Schedules to the Constitution are not be given any circumscribed pedantic 
construction; instead they are to be examined in widest possible spectrum; 
entries are the fields in which the Legislature of the State are empowered 
to act and frame laws. In Lahore Development Authority versus Ms. 
ImranaTiwana (2015 SCMR 1739
 ), the Supreme Court affirmed that Article 
4 of the Constitution was not accepted as criterion to test the vires of 
legislation. In celebrated judgment of M/s Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd. versus 
Federation of Pakistan PLD 1997 SC 582
 (the said judgment will be 
discussed in detail subsequently), the Supreme Court of Pakistan reiterated 
that the law is to be saved rather than to be destroyed and in case of any 
anomaly or ambiguity, provisions of the Statute are to be read down to 
save the law. In State of M.P versus Rakesh Kohli (2013 SCMR 34
 ), the 
Indian Supreme Court held that legislative enactment could be struck down 
by Court only on two grounds, firstly where the appropriate Legislature did 
not have competency to make the law and secondly, where it (enactment) 
abridged any of the fundamental rights enumerated in the Constitution or 
any other constitutional provisions. It was furthered that no enactment can 
be struck down merely for the reason that it was arbitrary or unreasonable 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
14 
or irrational but some constitutional infirmity had to be found and 
specified. 
9. 
10. 
The principles emerging from the above case law are as follow:- 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
This Court, under Article 199 of the Constitution, has 
jurisdiction to examine the validity of an Act of the Parliament 
or Rules framed thereunder. 
The constitutionality of any enactment can be examined on 
the touchstone of fundamental rights and/or any provision of 
the Constitution and if an enactment fails to pass the test of 
conformity or is derogatory to the fundamental rights or 
provisions of the Constitution, without a legitimate purpose to 
justify such derogation, it may be struck down. 
Vires of an enactment can also be examined on the basis of 
competence of the Legislature. 
The interpretation of the enactment under challenge should 
be done in such a way that the law should be endeavored to 
be saved rather than to be struck down. 
While interpreting an entry in the Legislative Lists of the 
Schedules to the Constitution, pith and substance of the entry 
is to be examined and they are to be given an expansive 
rather than narrow pedantic interpretation. 
In order to save the legislation, it should be read down in 
such a way so as to harmonize the fundamental rights 
enshrined in the Constitution and/or other provisions of the 
statutes.   
From the above, it follows that the first and foremost priority for the 
Court is to endeavor to save law instead of destroying it; and, while the 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
15 
language of the provisions of Constitutional Rights may provide for 
derogation from such rights, such derogation is not the general rule, rather 
it is the exception to the general rule. Such derogation is allowed not only 
on the basis of a public purpose, but where the measure taken to achieve 
such purpose is proportional to the same. In light of the above enumerated 
principles and parameters of determination of constitutionality and/or vires 
of any legislation, this Court shall now adjudicate upon the aforementioned 
key issues with regard to the impugned provision. 
Legislative Competence
 In the assault made on the impugned provision on the basis of 
constitutionality and competence, much was said, on behalf of the 
Petitioners, about the competence of the Legislature on the basis that the 
charging provision or the provision levying tax on deemed income derived 
from capital assets is in actuality a tax on immoveable property. In this 
regard, reference was made to Entries No.47 and 50in the Fourth Schedule 
to the Constitution. Under Article 70 sub-Article 4 of the Constitution, the ―Federal Legislative List‖ means the Federal Legislative List in the Fourth 
Schedule. This List provides subjects on which the Parliament/Majlis-e
Shoora can legislate on a particular subject within its competence. The 
Entries relevant for the present purpose are Entries No.47 and 50, as 
reproduced below:- ―47. 
…………. 
50. 
Taxes on income other than agricultural income. 
Taxes on the capital value of the assets, not including taxes on 
immoveable property.‖ 
Examination of Entry No.47 shows that it provides for levy of tax on 
income other than agricultural income and Entry No.50 provides for taxes 
on capital value of assets, not including taxes on immoveable property.  
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
16 
11. 
The crux of the submissions made by the learned counsels for the 
Petitioners was that in essence, the charging section imposes tax on the 
immoveable property, which is beyond the legislative competence of the 
Parliament and after the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution, it is 
the domain of the Provincial Legislature. In order to appreciate the said 
argument, at this juncture, it is pertinent to take guidance from the 
principles enunciated in a very authoritative pronouncement on various 
aspects of examining the vires of a statute, an entry in the Legislative Lists, 
and levy of tax on particular subject viz. Messrs Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd. 
versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1997 SC 582
 ) supra. The Supreme 
Court of Pakistan in the said judgment after examining the power of the 
State to levy tax and also the various aspects thereof, summarized the 
principles in paragraphs-31 of the judgment, which are as follow:- ―(i)  
(ii)  
(iii)  
(iv) 
That in view of wide variety of diverse economic criteria, which are to be 
considered for the formulation of a fiscal policy, Legislature enjoys a wide 
latitude in the matter of selection of persons, subject-matter, events, etc. 
for taxation. But with all this latitude certain irreducible desiderata of 
equality shall govern classification for differential treatment in taxation 
law as well. 
That Courts while interpreting laws relating to economic activities view 
the same with greater latitude than the laws relating to civil rights such as 
freedom of speech, religion etc., keeping in view the complexity of 
economic problems which do not admit of solution through any 
doctrinaire or straitjacket formula as pointed out by Holmes, J. in one of 
his judgments. 
That Frankfurter J., in Morey v. Doud (1957) U.S. 457 has remarked that 
"in the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good 
reasons for judicial self-restraint if not judicial deference to the legislative 
judgment"; 
That the Legislature is competent to classify persons or properties into 
different categories subject to different rates of tax. But if the same class 
of property similarly situated is subject to an incidence of taxation, which 
results in inequality amongst holders of the same kind of property, it is 
liable to be struck down on account of infringement of the fundamental 
right relating to equality. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
17 
(v)  
(vi)  
That "a State does not have to tax everything in order to tax something. 
It is allowed to pick and choose districts, objects, persons, methods and 
even rates for taxation if it does so reasonably". (Willi's Constitutional 
Law). 
That the tests of the vice of discrimination in a taxing law are less 
rigorous. If there is equality and uniformity within each group founded on 
intelligible differentia having a rational nexus with the object sought to be 
achieved by the law, the Constitutional mandate that a law should not be 
discriminatory is fulfilled. 
(vii) That the policy of a tax, in its operation, may result in hardships or 
advantages or disadvantages to individual assessees which are accidental 
and inevitable. Simipliciter this fact will not constitute violation of any of 
the fundamental rights. 
(viii) 
(ix)  
(x)  
(xi)  
(xii)  
(xiii) 
That while interpreting Constitutional provisions Court should keep in 
mind, social setting of the country, growing requirements of the 
society/nation, burning problems of the day and the complex issues 
facing the people, which the Legislature in its wisdom through legislation 
seeks to solve. The judicial approach should be dynamic rather than 
static, pragmatic and not pedantic and elastic rather, than rigid. 
That the law should be saved rather than be destroyed and the Court 
must lean in favour of upholding the constitutionality of a legislation 
keeping in view that the rule of Constitutional interpretation is that there 
is a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of the legislative 
enactments unless ex facie it is `violative. of a Constitutional provision. 
That as per dictionary the word 'income' means "a thing that comes in". 
Its natural meaning embraces any profit or gain which is actually 
received. However, while construing the above word used in an entry in a 
legislative list, the above restricted meaning cannot be applied keeping in 
view that the allocation of the subjects to the lists is not by way of 
scientific or logical definition but by way of mere simplex enumeration of 
broad categories. 
That the expression "income" includes not merely what is received or 
what comes in by exploiting the use of a property but also what one 
saves by using it oneself. For example, use of a house by its owner. 
That what is not "income" under the Income Tax Act can be made 
"income" by a Finance Act. An exemption granted by the Income Tax Act 
can be withdrawn by the Finance Act or the efficacy of that exemption 
may be reduced by the imposition of a new charge, of course, subject to 
Constitutional limitations. 
That the question, whether a particular kind of receipt is income or not 
would depend for its answer on the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
the case. If the nature of the receipt and its source are not satisfactorily 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
18 
explained by an assessee, facts which are generally within his peculiar 
knowledge, the Income Tax Officer may legitimately presume that the 
amount in question is an income of the assessee from an undisclosed 
source. 
(xiv)  
(xv)  
(xvi)  
(xvii)  
That the expression "clothes make the man" would be more nearly right if 
it were "Income makes the man". Knowledge about the income of a 
person will reveal most about him. It is a barometer to evaluate about his 
habits and views. 
In Haig's language income is "the increase or accretion in one's power to 
satisfy his wants in a given period in so far as that power consists of (a) 
money itself or (b) anything susceptible of valuation in terms of money, 
whereas Simons equates personal income with algebraic sum of 
consumption and change is net worth". 
That the process of income determination is often expressed as one of 
the matching costs and revenues. It involves the process of working out 
costs used in connection with the earning of the revenue in a particular 
accounting period. 
That generally the effect of a deeming provision in a taxing statute is that 
it brings within the tax net an amount which ordinarily would not have 
been treated as an income. In other words, it brings within the net of 
chargeability income not actually accrued but which supposedly to have 
accrued notionally. 
(xviii)  That when a statute enacts that something shall be deemed to have been 
done which in fact and in truth was not done,the Court is entitled and 
bound to ascertain for what purposes and between what persons the 
statutory fiction is to be resorted to. 
(xix)  
(xx)  
(xxi)  
(xxii)  
That where a person is deemed to be something the only meaning 
possible is that whereas he is not in reality that something, the Act 
required him to be treated as he were with all inevitable corollaries of that 
state of affairs. 
That the legal fictions are limited for a definite purpose, they cannot be 
extended beyond the purpose for which they are created. 
That income-tax is a tax on a person in relation to his income. It is a tax 
imposed upon a person (natural or artificial) in relation to his income. 
That any legislation whereby either the prices of marketable commodities 
are fixed in such a way as to bring them below the cost of production and 
thereby make it impossible for a citizen to carry on his business or tax is 
imposed to such a way so as to result in acquiring property of those on 
whom the incidence of taxation fell, then such legislation would be 
violative of the fundamental rights to carry on business and to hold 
property as guaranteed in the Constitution. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
19 
(xxiii)  That the taxing power is unlimited as long as it does not amount to 
confiscation and that the Legislature does not have the power to tax to 
the point of confiscation. 
(xxiv)  That the word 'reasonable' is a relative generic term 'difficult of adequate 
definition. It inter alia connotes agreeable to reason; conformable to 
reason; having the faculty of reason; rational; thinking, speaking, or 
acting rationally; or according to the dictates of reason; of sensible; just; 
proper and equitable or to act within the Constitutional bounds. 
(xxv)  That a direct tax is one which "is demanded front the very person, who it 
is intended or desired should pay it, whereas indirect taxes are those, 
which are demanded from tine person in the expectation and intention 
that lie shall indemnify himself at the expense of another, like custom 
duties, excise taxes and sales tax, which are borne by the consumers. 
(xxvi)  That levy of building tax on the basis of the covered area without taking 
into consideration, the class to which a particular building belongs, the 
nature of construction, the purpose for which it is used, its situation and 
its capacity for profitable use and other relevant circumstances bearing on 
the matters of taxation is not sustainable in law for want of reasonable 
classification. 
(xxvii)  That there is a clear distinction between the subject-matter of a tax and 
the standard by which the amount of tax is measured keeping iii view the 
practical difficulties, which are encountered by the Revenue to locate the 
persons and to collect the tax due in certain trades, if the Legislature in 
its wisdom thought that it would facilitate the collection of tax due from 
specified traders on a presumptive basis, the same is not violative of the 
Fundamental Right relating to equality. 
(xxviii)  That denial of reliefs provided by sections 28 to 43-C of the Indian 
Income Tax Act to the particular business or trades covered by section 
44-AC thereof without showing some basis fair and rational and without 
having nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the Legislature, held 
unfair, arbitrary, disproportionate to the prevalent evil and constitutes 
denial of equal treatment. Consequently, the Indian Supreme Court did 
not press into service non obstante clause of section 44-AC by applying 
theory of reading down as a rule of interpretation. 
(xxix)  That it is an accepted canon of taxation to levy tax- on the basis of ability 
to pay. The section 115-J and 115-JA incorporated in Indian Income Tax 
Act, 1961, were intended and designed to bring within the tax net the 
companies, which though making huge profits and also declaring 
substantial dividends, but have been managing their affairs in such a. way 
by availing of tax concessions etc., as to avoid payment of income-tax. 
(xxx)  That the theory of reading down is a rule of interpretation which is 
resorted to by the Courts when they find a provision read literally seems 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
20 
to offend a fundamental right or falls outside the competence of the 
particular Legislature. 
(xxxi) That though the Legislature has the prerogative to decide the questions 
of quantum of tax, the conditions subject to which it is levied, the manner 
in which it is sought to be recovered, but if a taxing statute is plainly 
discriminatory or provides no procedural machinery for assessment and 
levy of the tax or that is confiscatory, the Court may strike down the 
impugned statute as unconstitutional. 
(xxxii)  That the rule of interpretation that while interpreting an entry in a 
Legislative List it should be given widest possible meaning does not mean 
that Parliament can choose to tax as income as item which in no rational 
sense can be regarded as a citizen's income. The item taxed should 
rationally be capable of being considered as the income of a citizen. 
(xxxiii)  That before charging tax, an assessee must be shown to have received 
income or the same has arisen and accrued or deemed to be sounder the 
statute. Any amount which cannot be treated as above is not an income 
and; therefore, cannot be subject to tax. 
(xxxiv) That there is a marked distinction between a tax on gross revenue and a 
tax on income, which for taxation purposes, means gains and profits: 
There may be considerable gross revenues, but no income taxable by an 
income-tax in the accepted sense.‖ 
The upshot of the above principles is that the State is the sovereign and 
has competence to legislate on matters specified under the Legislative List 
within its domain. Further, the State as a sovereign is competent to impose 
tax in furtherance of economic activities and to generate the income in 
order to run the affairs of the government.  
12. 
In light of this discussion, if the charging section of the impugned 
provision i.e. sub-section (2) is re-read, which provides for deemed income 
derived from the capital value of assets, defined as essentially immoveable 
property, it shows that the same is not really a tax on the immovable 
property as by virtue of fiction, i.e. deeming clause, it is deemed that a 
capital asset is deriving income which it might not actually derive. In light 
of Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd
 (supra) there is no prohibition on the Legislature 
from creating legal fiction so long as the same is within the purpose of the 
basic legislation; likewise, there is no prohibition against taxation on such 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
21 
deemed income, which in actuality may not be earned but is to be taxed. 
In view of the said interpretation, it cannot be said that this imposition of 
tax by fiction of law falls within Entry No.50 of the Fourth Schedule to the 
Constitution, rather falls within Entry No.47, which provides for imposition 
of tax on income other than agricultural income. In reaching this 
conclusion, this Court is fortified by all the principles on the subject which 
have been reiterated, and a deeming effect can be given to generation of 
income. In order to further elaborate the concept of a deeming provision in 
the context of a presumptive tax regime, it must be understood that such a 
deeming enactment is something which the Legislature taxes on 
presumption, regardless of whether it exists in reality, as is the case in the 
instant provision, and that any capital asset owned by a resident person 
which may not actually be generating any income but it has been 
presumed by Legislature that it is deriving income equal to 5% of the fair 
market value of the said asset. Such deeming provisions are never 
regarded as alien to the concept of the legislation provided that it falls 
within the basic purpose of that enactment. It is only when it fails the basic 
purpose that the Court shall presume to deem them or would declare such 
assumption to be repugnant or beyond the scope of Legislature.  
13. 
I, therefore, do not agree with the Petitioners‘ submissions 
regarding sub-section (2) of the impugned provision being a tax on the 
immoveable property of a resident person taking it beyond the legislative 
competence of the Parliament. Furthermore, it is re-capitulated that it is, in 
fact, a fiction of law which presumes generation of income from the capital 
asset which is then taxed. The tax in question is, therefore, levied on the 
deemed income and not on the immovable property. The question of 
competence of the legislature is therefore answered in the affirmative, and 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
22 
the impugned provision is, therefore, well within legislative competence of 
the Parliament.  
14. 
Elements of Discrimination
 The concept of income is defined in the Ordinance in section 2(29) 
and is as follow:- ―Income‖ includes any amount chargeable to tax under this Ordinance, any 
amount subject to collection [or deduction] of tax under section 148,  [150, 
152(1), 153, 154, 156, 156A, 233, sub-section (5) of section 234,  [section 236Z] 
[and] [any amount treated as income under any provision of this Ordinance] and 
any loss of income.‖ 
Bare reading of the definition shows that any amount may be treated as 
income under any provisions of the Ordinance. To fortify my 
understanding, I have referred to the detailed examination of all the 
various aspects of the concept of tax, more specifically tax on income and 
its nature, as provided in the Corpus Juris Secundum5. Tax is a revenue
raising exaction imposed through generally applicable rates to defray public 
expenses6. In the elaboration it is provided that the primary purpose of a 
tax is to raise money, and not to regulate; in other words, it represents the 
legislature‘s definition of the measure of every citizen‘s duty in support of 
public burden.7 The purpose of the theory of taxation is essentially to 
support and fund the functioning of the government in return for the 
general advantages and protection which the government affords to the 
taxpayer citizens and their properties. Taxes can be classified as being 
either direct or indirect8and the character of a tax depends on the 
legislative intent as expressed in the statute imposing it9. The power of the 
State to levy taxes is inherent in the power to govern and, except as 
5Corpus Juris Secundum Vols. 84 and 85. 
6
 II. Taxing Power, Limitations, and Constitutional Restrictions – Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 84. 
7
 II. Taxing Power, Limitations, and Constitutional Restrictions – Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 84. 
8
 Ibid. 
9
 Ibid. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
23 
limited by constitutional provisions, is practically without limit, extending to 
all persons, property and business over which the sovereign power of the 
State extends10. In this behalf, elements of neither equality nor 
reasonableness are regarded in the exercise of the State‘s power to tax as 
unjust or oppressive. However, the constitutional provisions regarding 
equality and uniformity in terms of taxation are mandatory and constitute a 
limitation on the legislative power to tax, so that statute relating to 
taxation must comply therewith, and a tax law which violates the 
prescribed rule of equality and uniformity is invalid. These mandatory 
requirements cannot be frittered away by judicial construction11. A tax law 
which violates the prescribed rule of equality and uniformity is, therefore, 
invalid. Any unreasonable discrimination between taxpayers on whom 
taxes have been levied and who are assessed on the same class of 
subjects constitutes a lack of equality and uniformity in violation of the 
constitutional provisions. Inequality will materialize where a taxing 
provision imposes upon one taxpayer payment of a heavier exaction than 
another merely because the former is assumed to be financially able to 
bear the exaction with less distress than the latter, and such inequality 
offends the constitutional principles of uniformity and equality12. 
Keeping in view the above principles and also those enunciated in the Elahi 
Cotton Mills Ltd
 case (supra), I am fortified in my view that the Legislature 
has the prerogative to decide the questions of quantum of tax, the 
conditions subject to which it is levied, and the manner in which it is 
sought to be recovered. But if a taxing statute is plainly discriminatory or 
provides no procedural machinery for assessment and levy of the tax or 
10Ibid. 
11Ibid. 
12II. Taxing Power, Limitations, and Constitutional Restrictions – Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 84. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
24 
where it is confiscatory, the Court may strike down the impugned statute 
as being unconstitutional13.  
Elements of Confiscation and Inequality
 In a certain way, every tax is confiscatory inasmuch as through sanction of 
the Parliament/government, part of an income derived by persons is taken 
away. This concept of the confiscation or confiscatory nature, as defined in 
Oxford Dictionary, is ‗to take or seize by the authority‘. Words and Phrases 
defines the term ‗confiscatory‘ with regards to taxation as a tax which not 
reasonably related to a substantial public purpose14.  If the taxing statute 
is confiscatory per se, it might not be in grave violation of constitutional 
provisions, especially the fundamental rights, since derogation therefrom is 
provided for to a certain extent within the same provisions. However, 
where confiscation is to such an extent that it is not reasonable, or it is 
beyond the extent of derogation as provided for within the same 
constitutional provisions, the statute in question will then be a grave 
violation of the fundamental rights of a person, thus, its validity cannot be 
upheld.  
In order to elaborate this observation further, it is essential to reproduce 
Articles 23 & 24 of the Constitution. Article 23 of the Constitution provides 
right for every citizen to acquire, hold and dispose of property in any part 
of Pakistan, subject to the Constitution and any reasonable restrictions 
imposed by law and Article 24 provides for protection of property rights. 
The referred Articles are reproduced below:- 
“23. Every citizen shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property in 
any part of Pakistan, subject to the Constitution and any reasonable restrictions 
imposed by law in the public interest. 
24. (1)  No person shall be deprived of his property save in accordance with law.  
13Ibid. 
14 Words and Phrases Vol. 8A – p. 560, 561. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
25 
(2) No property shall be compulsorily acquired or taken possession of save for a 
public purpose, and save by the authority of law which provides for compensation 
therefore and either fixes the amount of compensation or specifies the principles 
on and the manner in which compensation is to be determined and given. 
(3) Nothing in this Article shall affect the validity of— 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
any law permitting the compulsory acquisition or taking possession of 
any property for preventing danger to life, property or public health; 
or 
any law permitting the taking over of any property which has been 
acquired by, or come into the possession of, any person by any unfair 
means, or in any manner, contrary to law; or 
any law relating to the acquisition, administration or disposal of any 
property which is or is deemed to be enemy property or evacuee 
property under any law (not being property  which has ceased to be 
evacuee property under any law); or  
any law providing for the taking over of the management of any 
property by the State for a limited period, either in the public interest 
or in order to secure the proper management of the property, or for 
the benefit of its owner; or 
any law providing for the acquisition of any class of property for the 
purpose of— 
(i)  
(ii)  
(iii) 
providing education and medical aid to all or any specified class of 
citizens; or  
providing housing and public facilities and services such as roads, 
water supply, sewerage, gas and electric power to all or any 
specified class of citizens; or  
providing 
maintenance to those who, on account of 
unemployment,  sickness, infirmity or old age, are unable to 
maintain themselves; or 
(f) any existing law or any law made in pursuance of Article 253. 
(4) The adequacy or otherwise of any compensation provided for by any such law 
as is referred to in this Article, or determined in pursuance thereof, shall not be 
called in question in any court.‖ 
Bare reading of Article 23 shows that every citizen has the right to acquire, 
hold and dispose of the property, provided there are no reasonable 
restrictions imposed by law in the public interest. As discussed above, 
taxation laws are confiscatory per se, but such confiscation is limited to the 
specific purpose in pursuance of which the law in question has been 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
26 
enacted. Where a certain portion of a resident person‘s earning is being 
taken away as payment of tax, such exaction made as to certain 
percentage of a larger amount earned or derived might not be as such 
harmful to any statute since the tax is being paid, or the exaction is being 
made out of an amount actually earned and only a portion of such actual 
earning is being taken away, however, where no income is actually earned 
and nothing is coming in yet a resident taxpayer is asked to pay something 
out of nothing, it may be regarded as confiscatory in the very sense of the 
concept and such confiscation would be unreasonable. As discussed above, 
the legislature can create a legal fiction by way of a deeming provision, 
and as such income which is not actually earned may be deemed to be 
earned, however, where to a certain extent a tax liability is to be imposed 
which is to be paid from a capital asset not generating any income may be 
considered as derogatory to Article 23 of the Constitution. Inasmuch as the 
referred Article does provide for reasonable restriction to be imposed on 
holding of the property, however, if a resident person who is a taxpayer is 
not generating any income which would fall within the definition of income 
as provided in section 2(29) of the Ordinance, but only by virtue of the fact 
that said person owns a capital asset which may as well have been gifted 
to him/her is being asked to pay liability on the same by treating the said 
assets as generating income is unreasonably confiscatory because 
eventually the taxpayer might have to dispose of the assets in order to pay 
such liability.  
14. 
In civilized society, the purpose of fundamental rights, as are 
provided in every legal system, is to provide basic protection to persons 
and though they are not absolute and do not exist in a vacuum, such rights 
can only be taken away or restricted in accordance with law. Fundamental 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
27 
rights are to be given broader interpretation and also are to be interpreted 
in such a way that they fulfill the requirements of modern society. The 
Constitution is an organic document and stagnancy cannot be attributed, 
and expansive interpretation is to be given to the same. In stating the said 
principles, I derive the wisdom of the Supreme Court of Pakistan as laid 
down Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif versus President of Pakistan (PLD 
1993 SC 473
 ); any curb on the fundamental rights is to be given a strictly 
restrictive interpretation. In the referred backdrop, the imposition of tax on 
5% of the fair market value of the capital asset on the basis that any 
capital asset which a resident person might hold is treated to be deriving 
income is confiscatory in nature, hence is in violation or derogation of 
Article 23 of the Constitution. The Lahore High Court in D.G. Khan Cement 
Company Ltd. versus Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2013 Lah 693)
 , while 
striking down section 8(1)(ca) of the Sales Tax Act, 1990, founded its 
reasoning on the basis of the relevant provision being in derogation of 
Article 23 of the Constitution. The referred judgment was authored by the 
Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, who, after referring to the said 
principle of reasonableness and while relying on the concept of the 
fundamental rights as contained in the United Nations Charter, held that 
the referred law was in violation of the Article 23 of the Constitution. 
This brings us to the next aspect of the impugned provision, i.e. how the 
elements of discrimination and confiscation unjustifiably infringe 
constitutional rights, and examination of the same in light of the principles 
laid down in Elahi Cotton Mills
 case, where the taxing statute is 
discriminatory and/or does not provide adequate machinery for recovery 
and/or otherwise is vague or unreasonable may be struck down. Reading 
of the impugned provision reveals that the tax is levied on 5% of the fair 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
28 
market value of a capital asset as defined therein, however there is no 
provision as to who shall determine the fair market value and the criteria 
thereof. Such determination of fair market value has been left upon the 
whims of the tax-master. Additionally, the language of the impugned 
provision is vague and does not provide for the machinery for recovery 
and, as already noted above, a resident person who is a taxpayer and is 
not generating income eventually might be forced to dispose of the 
property if the person is unable to pay such tax. This makes the provision 
not only simply confiscatory but also, since no machinery for recovery of 
the assessment and is provided, makes it vague. 
There is no cavil to the position that the Courts must endeavor to save the 
law rather than destroy it and as such, Courts must interpret a statute in a 
manner which is harmonious to the spirit and provisions of the 
Constitution. Where the vires of a law has been challenged on the 
touchstone of its constitutionality, while engaging in the interpretive 
exercise, Courts may read down the statute in an attempt to harmonize it 
with the constitutional principles and provisions. Albeit that such an 
exercise is undertaken for the purpose of saving the law instead of striking 
it down, where the interpretive exercise of reading down either yields an 
absurd conclusion, or does not bring the law under challenge within the 
constitutional parameters, in such cases there is no other option but to 
strike it down. This approach, though avoided by the Courts, becomes 
essential in cases where the law cannot be interpreted or read down to 
achieve harmony, for the reason that the Constitution is supreme and shall 
always prevail.  
15. 
The charging provision may also be regarded as discriminatory on 
the basis that there exists no criterion for the required exaction to be 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
29 
made. The Legislature has provided certain inclusion and exclusion from 
the impugned charging provision but there does not seem to be any basis 
thereof. Though sub-section 4 does provide for inclusion and exclusion of 
the categories of persons who are to be taxed, there does not seem to be 
any cogent reason thereof. Article 25 of the Constitution prohibits 
discrimination and provides for equality of all citizens. It says that all 
citizens are equal before the law and are entitled to equal protection of 
law. By imposition of tax on the resident person, who only holds a capital 
asset and does not fall within the exemptions can be said to be 
discriminatory against such person. The interpretation rendered to Article 
25 of the Constitution in the authoritative pronouncement reported as I.A 
Sherwani and others versus Government of Pakistan (1991 SCMR 1041)
 is 
that there can be reasonable classification and where intelligible differentia 
exists between the said classifications, there shall be no instance of 
discrimination. The term ―intelligible‖ connotes that it must be intelligible, 
or understandable, to a person of ordinary intelligence15.If the principles 
enunciated in I.A. Sherwani
 case and the concept of a criteria being 
intelligible are applied to the exemptions provided under the impugned 
provision, there seems to be neither any basis for classification, nor is 
there an intelligible differentia to form the basis of such classification, and 
the Legislature has deemed it on its whims. The lack of classification in the 
charging section, coupled with the absence of any intelligible differentia 
between the said persons who are to be taxed or exempted there from 
results in a confiscation which, in effect, translates to inequality. A similar 
question was decided by the Supreme Court of India in a case16, which has 
also been relied upon by the Supreme Court of Pakistan in its judgment in 
15 Words and Phrases Vol. 21B p. 495 
16KunnathaThathunniMoopil Nair etc. v. State of Kerala and another (AIR 1961 SC 552) 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
30 
the case of Elahi Cotton Mills
 (supra), wherein a tax had been imposed 
requiring every person holding land to pay such tax at a prescribed flat 
rate, regardless of whether or not any income was being derived the said 
property or whether the said property was capable of yielding any income 
at all. The Court in this case explored the effect of such tax through a 
hypothetical scenario as follows: ―…Under the Act in question we shall take a hypothetical case of a number 
of persons owning and possessing the same area of land. One makes 
nothing out of the land, because it is arid desert. The one does not make 
any income, but could raise some crop after a disproportionately large 
investment of a labour and capital. A third one, in due course of 
husbandry, is making the land yield just enough to pay for the incidental 
expenses and labour charges besides land tax or revenue. The fourth is 
making large profits, because the land is very fertile and capable of 
yielding good crops. Under the Act, it is manifest that the fourth category, 
in our illustration, would easily be able to bear the burden of the tax. The 
third one may be able to bear the tax. The first and the second one will 
have to pay from their own pockets, if they could afford the tax. If they 
cannot afford the tax, the property is liable to be sold, in due process of 
law, for realization of the public demand. It is clear, therefore, that 
inequality is writ large on the Act and is inherent in the very provisions of 
the taxing section. It is also clear that there is no attempt at classification 
in the provisions of the Act. Hence, no more need be said as to what could 
have been the basis for a valid classification. It is one of those cases 
where the lack of classification creates inequality. It is, therefore, clearly 
hit by the prohibition to deny equality before the law contained in Article 
14 of the Constitution. Furthermore, section 7 of the Act, quoted above, 
particularly the latter part, which vests the Government with the power 
wholly or partially to exempt any land from the provisions of the Act, is 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
31 
clearly discriminatory in its effect and, therefore, infringes Article 14 of the 
Constitution. The Act does not lay down any principle or policy for the 
guidance of the exercise of the discretion by the Government in respect of 
the selection contemplated by section 7." 
On these basis, the Court declared the provisions to be ultra vires. 
Furthermore, in light of paragraph-31 (xxxi) of Elahi Cotton Mills case,
 if 
tax is levied in such a way that it operates in a discriminatory manner 
against any person, it can be struck down.  
16. 
In lieu of the detailed discussion above regarding the different 
elements of a taxing provision, I will now deliberate upon the nature and 
purpose of section 7E and whether the same, in pith and substance, is in 
violation of the constitutional rights and provisions. At the cost of 
repetition, it is understood that tax laws are by nature confiscatory, and as 
such, do infringe constitutional rights. This confiscation is supposed to be 
justified by a reasonable purpose which is in the public interest, and the 
proportionality of the measure of tax in context of said purpose. Section 7E 
requires tax to be paid on income deemed to be derived from capital 
assets as defined therein; it however does not classify any categories of 
the capital assets. The tax is to be imposed, at the rates specified in the 
relevant Schedule to the Ordinance, on 5% of the fair market value of the 
capital asset. No mechanism for determination of such fair market value 
has been provided for, neither is there any clarity with regards to different 
classes of properties. A person owning a large commercial plot, for 
instance, may be in a better position to pay such tax, however an owner of 
a small residential plot, or otherwise a plot which may not even have the 
capacity to yield any income whatsoever, may not have the ability to fulfill 
this burden. Although hardship is not ground enough for declaring a taxing 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
32 
statute unconstitutional, but the tax under challenge would force the 
taxpayer who cannot pay the same to dispose of the capital asset. It is a 
settled principle that ordinarily, a tax on land or on land revenue is 
assessed on the actual or the potential productivity of the land sought to 
be taxed17. Similarly, a tax on income deemed to be derived from land 
must be imposed according to the potential capacity of the said land to 
yield income, deemed or otherwise. Though the presumptive tax regime 
has been upheld by the Supreme Court through numerous judgments, 
including that of Elahi Cotton Mills case, such presumptive taxation must 
be based on a comprehensive structure and must fall within the 
parameters of the Act itself, as well as constitutional provisions. The 
impugned provision lacks any such comprehensive structure, parameters or 
guidelines, it does not specify any method of computation of the fair 
market value of the asset in question, neither does it provide any 
classification of assets nor any machinery for recovery. Furthermore, the 
exemptions provided within the impugned provisions create classification 
which is not justified by any intelligible differentia; and in its effect, the 
impugned tax would force a taxpayer to dispose of property upon failure to 
pay such tax. This imposition of tax is, therefore, arbitrary and the 
elements of inequality, discrimination and the extent of confiscation are not 
justifiable by any measure and are thus tantamount to an illegal derogation 
from constitutional rights and provisions. 
17. 
It is pertinent to state that vires of the impugned provision was 
under challenge before the three other High Courts i.e. the Sindh High 
Court, the Lahore High Court and Peshawar High Court. The Hon‘ble Sindh 
High Court upheld the vires of section 7E, whereas the learned Single 
17 AIR 1961 SC 552 (ibid); PLD 1997 SC 582 (ibid) 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
33 
Bench of the Lahore High Court, in its judgment, suggested changes and 
endeavored to read down the provision; this judgment was however set 
aside by the learned Division Bench. The Peshawar High Court has struck 
down the law for being ultra vires. The judgments of the referred High 
Courts are not binding on this Court, but I do have the benefit of their 
wisdoms, however, I fail to bring myself in agreement with their respective 
views and reasoning, even with that of the Hon‘ble Peshawar High Court 
which has struck down the law, however, at this juncture, it is only 
appropriate to observe that every High Court has territorial jurisdiction and 
the matter falling within the territorial jurisdiction is brought to the Court 
and is accordingly decided and if any particular issue is decided by any of 
the High Courts, the judgment is in personam and the principles laid down 
therein are of general obligation and the same are not binding but a 
judgment handed down in a case such as this, where vires of the statute is 
under challenge and if declared to be ultra vires, the judgment cannot be 
said to be in personam but is in rem and the effect thereof is ultimately to 
be examined by the Supreme Court of Pakistan in an appropriate case. I 
am of the view that if one High Court strikes down a law, the judgment 
being in rem, the legal obligation thereunder disappears and it cannot be 
said that such disappearance is only to the extent of territorial area to 
which the jurisdiction of the said High Court extends. The concept of a 
judgment in rem was discussed in detail by the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
in Pir Bakhsh and The Chairman, Allotment Committee and others (PLD 
1987 SC 145)
 . The concept was explained as follows:- ―The terms "in rem" and "in personam" are of Roman Law used in 
connection with actio, that is, actio in rem and actio in personam to denote the 
nature of actions, and with the disappearance of the Roman forms of procedure, 
each of the two terms "in rem" and "in personam" got tagged with the word 
judgments to denote the end-products of actions in rem and actions in personam. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
34 
Thus, according to the civil law an actio in which a claim of ownership was made 
against all other persons was an action in rem and the judgment pronounced in 
such action was a judgment in rem and binding upon all persons whom the Court 
was competent to bind, but if the claim was made against a particular person or 
persons, it was an action in personam and the decree was a decree in personam 
and binding only upon the particular person or persons against whom the claim 
was preferred or persons who were privies to them. 
The point adjudicated upon in a judgment in rem is always as to the 
status of the res and is conclusive against the world as to that status, whereas in 
a judgment in personam the point, whatever it may be, which is adjudicated 
upon, it not being as to the status of the res, is conclusive only between parties or 
privies. A decision in rem not merely declares the status of the person or thing, 
but ipso facto renders it such as it is declared. 
Section 41 of the Evidence Act, 1872 does not use the term 
"judgment in rem", but it incorporates the law on the subject of "judgments in 
rem" and makes them relevant not only against strangers but also conclusive of 
certain matters such as whether a person was entitled to a legal character or to 
any specific thing not as against any specified person but absolutely. 
Judgments in rem are an exception to the rule of law that no man should 
be bound by the decision of a Court of justice unless he or those under whom he 
claims were parties to the proceeding in which it was given. This rule of law is 
referable to the maxims of Roman Law namely, "Res inter alios judicata nullun 
inter 
aliosprejudicium facit," or "Res inter aliosactaalteri nocere non dibet" 
Such exception of the judgment in rem in the Roman Law was the foundation of 
the exception in English Law. Section 41 of the Evidence Act is the foundation for 
the exception of judgment in rem in our corpus juris. The reason why a judgment 
should not be used to the prejudice of a stranger is that he is denied the funda 
mental right to make a defence, or to examine or cross-examine witnesses or to 
appeal from a judgment which aggrieves him. This is the requirement of most 
manifest justice and good sense.‖ 
This view was followed by this Court in Bannu Woolen Mills Ltd. versus 
Federation of Pakistan (2015 PTD 1058 Islamabad)
 .  
17. 
Summing up the reasoning as stated hereinabove, sub-section 2 of 
the impugned provision is confiscatory in nature and also discriminatory in 
its effect, and thus constitutes a violation of Article 25 of the Constitution. 
It also violates Article 23 of the Constitution and goes beyond the ambit of 
reasonable restrictions as provided thereunder, hence, is liable to be struck 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
35 
down. Moreover, the classes or exemptions provided from payment of the 
tax does not seem to have any proper basis and has been created at 
whims of the Legislature which cannot be regarded as reasonable 
classification or classification based on intelligible differentia, hence violates 
Article 25 of the Constitution. Neither the machinery for assuming the fair 
market value has been provided, nor the recovery mechanism, and on the 
touchstone of Messrs Elahi Cotton Mills
 the basis for striking down a statute. 
18. 
(supra), such deficiencies may form 
For the above reasons, the instant petition as well as petitions 
mentioned in the schedule are allowed and sub-section 2 of the impugned 
provision i.e. Section 7E of the Ordinance, is declared to be ultra vires the 
Constitution, hence it is struck down and is declared to be void ab initio. 
Consequently, the notices issued by the department under section 7E ibid 
are also set aside for being without lawful authority. 
Before parting, I would like to acknowledge the hard work put in by Ms. 
Maheen Zeeshan, Advocate (my law clerk). It was only her ceaseless 
efforts to research the material with respect to legal issues involved that 
made the above reasoning possible. 
(CHIEF JUSTICE) 
Announced in open Court this 19th day of February, 2024. 
(CHIEF JUSTICE) 
M.Shah/.
 Approved for reporting
 .
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 36 
SCHEDULE 
LIST OF PETITIONS CONNECTED WITH W.P No.213/2023 
S.No. Case No. Title 
 1. W.P. No.4880/2022 Ejaz Hussain Rathore 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
2. W.P. No.191/2023 Waseem ur Rehman 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
3. W.P. No.192/2023 Sami ur Rehman 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
4. W.P. No.247/2023 Muhammad Naeem  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
5. W.P. No.343/2023 Mrs. Beena Riaz Malik  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
6. W.P. No.344/2023 Syed Waqar Ali Bokhari 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
7. W.P. No.345/2023 Syed Zulfiqar Ali Bokhari 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
8. W.P. No.397/2023 Shah Khalid  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
9. W.P. No.440/2023 Irfan ul Wahab Khan  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
10. W.P. No.442/2023 Saeed Ashraf  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
11. W.P. No.443/2023 Muzaffar Ahmad Virk  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
12. W.P. No.478/2023 M/s Imex Associates  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
13. W.P. No.541/2023 Muhammad Sabeeh Khawaja  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
14. W.P. No.544/2023 Mrs. Razia Saeed  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
15. W.P. No.545/2023 Naseer Ahmed Malik  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
16. W.P. No.548/2023 Chaudhry Muhammad Tahir  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 37 
17. W.P. No.549/2023 Muhammad Kaleem Ullah 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
18. W.P. No.579/2023 Muhammad Usman Rafi  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
19. W.P. No.629/2023 Chaudhary Farrukh Raza  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
20. W.P. No.680/2023 Dr. Kamran Masud 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
21. W.P. No.695/2023 Chaudhry Tariq Mehmood Toor 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
22. W.P. No.771/2023 Muhammad Tariq  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
23. W.P. No.918/2023 Hashmat Iqbal  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
24. W.P. No.958/2023 Tahir Idris  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
25. W.P. No.1042/2023 Mst. Zill e Huma  
Versus  
Pakistan through Federal Secretary, M/o Finance, 
etc.  
26. W.P. No.1043/2023 Atif Ikram 
Versus  
Pakistan through Federal Secretary, M/o Finance, 
etc.  
27. W.P. No.1155/2023 Ch. Amir Mumtaz 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
28. W.P. No.1248/2023 Mrs. Mona Akbar, etc.  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
29. W.P. No.1520/2023 Muhammad Ali  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
30. W.P. No.2106/2023 Chaudhary Mukhtar Ahmed  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
31. W.P. No.2353/2023 Naveed Yousaf 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
32. W.P. No.2361/2023 Zulfiqar Ali  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
33. W.P. No.2521/2023 Muhammad Abid 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 38 
34. W.P. No.2522/2023 Muhammad Asad 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
35. W.P. No.2563/2023 Muhammad Saeed  
Versus  
Finance Division, through Secretary, M/o Finance, 
etc. 
36. W.P. No.2588/2023 Muhammad Mudassar 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
37. W.P. No.2589/2023 Noor-ul-Amin  
Versus  
Finance Division, through Secretary, M/o Finance, 
etc. 
38. W.P. No.2652/2023 Misbah ul Hassan  
Versus  
Finance Division, through Secretary, M/o Finance, 
etc. 
39. W.P. No.2675/2023 Hamayun Naseer, etc.  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
40. W.P. No.3009/2023 Hafiz Mohsin Akhtar  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
41. W.P. No.3011/2023 Shabbir Ahmad  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
42. W.P. No.3083/2023 Daud Abid 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
43. W.P. No.3232/2023 Maleeha Hammad 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
44. W.P. No.3233/2023 Muhammad Shafique Malik  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
45. W.P. No.3234/2023 Sabahat Talha 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
46. W.P. No.3235/2023 Mahreen Binte Talha 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
47. W.P. No.3370/2023 Muhammad Talha Mehmood 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
48. W.P. No.3375/2023 Muhammad Shamroz Khan Aryan  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
49. W.P. No.3463/2023 Muhammad Mustafa Bin Talha 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
50. W.P. No.3464/2023 Muhammad Qasim Bin Talha 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
W.P. No.213/2023 & Others 
39 
51. 
W.P. No.3580/2023 
Malik Muhammad Akmal 
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
52. 
W.P. No.3581/2023 
Raza Abbas Rajput  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
53. 
W.P. No.3735/2023 
Mst. Robena Aryan  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 
54. 
W.P. No.3789/2023 
Waheed Ashraf  
Versus  
Federation  of Pakistan, etc. 